---
article:
  doi: 10.21428/d28e8e57.072621d7/7ae8ab52
  elocation-id: e2pharmpricing
author:
- Evaluator 2
bibliography: /tmp/tmp-55u9leVi1RnKck.json
copyright:
  link: "https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/"
  text: Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License
  type: CC-BY
csl: /app/dist/server/server/utils/citations/citeStyles/apa-6th-edition.csl
date:
  day: 30
  month: 06
  year: 2025
journal:
  publisher-name: The Unjournal
  title: The Unjournal
link-citations: true
title: Evaluation 2 of "Pharmaceutical Pricing and R&D as a Global
  Public Good"
uri: "https://unjournal.pubpub.org/pub/e2pharmpricing"
---

# Abstract 

**Strengths and achievements:**\
1. Applies a classic public-good model to explain why U.S. drug prices
exceed those in ROW and remain below the global optimum\
2. Empirical markups dispel the notion that non-U.S. markets fully
free-ride\
Positive GDP--price correlation aligns with theoretical predictions\
\
**Critiques, limitations, and suggestions:**\
1. Empirical tests are correlational and could have alternate
explanations\
2. Theoretical results rest on the assumption of optimal centralized
government action\
3. Policy prescriptions likely warrant further empirical validation\

# Summary Measures

We asked evaluators to give some overall assessments, in addition to
ratings across a range of criteria. *See the *[*evaluation summary
"metrics"*](https://unjournal.pubpub.org/pub/evalsumpharmpricing#metrics "null")*
for a more detailed breakdown of this. See these ratings in the context
of all Unjournal ratings, with some analysis, in our *[*data
presentation
here.*](https://unjournal.github.io/unjournaldata/chapters/evaluation_data_analysis.html#basic-presentation "null")[^1]*
*

+-------------------+-------------------+---+
|                   | **Rating**        | * |
|                   |                   | * |
|                   |                   | 9 |
|                   |                   | 0 |
|                   |                   | % |
|                   |                   | C |
|                   |                   | r |
|                   |                   | e |
|                   |                   | d |
|                   |                   | i |
|                   |                   | b |
|                   |                   | l |
|                   |                   | e |
|                   |                   | I |
|                   |                   | n |
|                   |                   | t |
|                   |                   | e |
|                   |                   | r |
|                   |                   | v |
|                   |                   | a |
|                   |                   | l |
|                   |                   | * |
|                   |                   | * |
+===================+===================+===+
| **Overall         | 30/100            | 1 |
| assessment **     |                   | 0 |
|                   |                   |   |
|                   |                   | - |
|                   |                   | 5 |
|                   |                   | 0 |
+-------------------+-------------------+---+
| **Journal rank    | 2.5/5             | 1 |
| tier, normative   |                   | . |
| rating**          |                   | 5 |
|                   |                   |   |
|                   |                   | - |
|                   |                   | 3 |
|                   |                   | . |
|                   |                   | 1 |
+-------------------+-------------------+---+

**Overall assessment **(See footnote[^2])

**Journal rank tier, normative rating (0-5): ** On a 'scale of
journals', what 'quality of journal' should this be published in?[^3]
*Note: 0= lowest/none, 5= highest/best. *

# Written report

## Summary

This paper applies a classic public-good model of pharmaceutical R&D to
explain why U.S. drug prices exceed those in the rest of the world (ROW)
and argues that even U.S. prices remain below the dynamic-optimum level.

Pharmaceutical R&D is a public good because all countries eventually
benefit from the information generated by the drug discovery process.
The paper suggests that one way to view the price difference between the
U.S. and the ROW is to consider it as arising optimally from a model in
which individual countries (or their governments) internalize only a
fraction of the benefit of future innovation. One key implication of
this model is that even U.S. prices are lower than optimal because the
U.S. is not internalizing the benefit of pharmaceutical R&D for other
countries.

The paper runs two empirical exercises. In the first, it estimates
average country-specific markups for pharmaceutical products. In doing
so, it dispels the notion that non-US countries are fully free-riding
(by paying only marginal cost or close to marginal cost for drugs)---a
view that is uncontroversial in the academic community but often
mentioned in popular media.

The second exercise tests a basic prediction of this model---that
countries with higher GDP will benefit more from future R&D and,
therefore, be more willing to pay higher prices for drugs. However,
while the paper uncovers a positive correlation consistent with the
predictions of the theoretical model, such a correlation could arise for
a variety of reasons, including the fact that richer countries may
simply place a higher value on *current* health benefits.

Ultimately, the ideas presented in the paper are well-supported by the
theory, even though the empirical analysis cannot provide unequivocal
evidence for all the theoretical implications.

## Main Comments

I will focus my comments on the two main claims that the paper makes.
The first claim is that U.S. drug prices are higher than those in the
ROW because the U.S. internalizes the impact of prices on R&D more than
the ROW. The second claim is that drug prices in *both the U.S. and ROW
*do not adequately incentivize R&D---though ROW prices are still higher
than marginal cost, thus generating some R&D incentives. I conclude by
briefly commenting on the empirical test comparing country prices to GDP
and the policy recommendations made in the paper's conclusion.

### Interpreting the conceptual framework of the paper

One of the paper's key claims is that the main reason the U.S. has the
highest drug prices in the world is that the country internalizes the
impact of prices on future innovation more than other countries due to
its high GDP. A high GDP also implies that the U.S. benefits the most
from future innovation.

An obvious critique of this statement is that U.S. prices reflect
instead domestic market imperfections such as:

1.  a fragmented insurance system that limits the bargaining power of
    any individual payer;\

2.  benefit design regulation that occasionally weakens payer incentives
    to push for lower prices---such as the pre-Inflation Reduction Act
    80 percent government reinsurance for spending above the
    catastrophic threshold in Medicare Part D (Frank and Zeckhauser
    2018[@neasfwhxs9v]; Sachs and Frank 2025 [@n3dgl88q4zm]);\

3.  government rules that lead to higher commercial prices (Duggan and
    Scott Morton, 2006 [@nohy7ws9hw3]; Ridley and Lee,
    2020[@np2hm5f2zlp]; Feng, Hwang, and Maini 2023[@n8okexuecey]);\

4.  rules around intellectual property protection and market exclusivity
    that can be exploited to keep competitors out of the market (Fowler
    2019 [@nhtwwro77fg]; Jacobo-Rubio, Turner, and Williams 2020
    [@n1j4nt34t3t]).

However, the paper's claim makes sense when thinking about the U.S.
*government* as the relevant decision-maker. In this context, the U.S.
government---aware of the benefits that future pharmaceutical R&D can
bring to U.S. patients---establishes rules to protect intellectual
property and payment systems (including private marketplaces), which
ultimately lead to the observed price outcomes. Under this framing, U.S.
market "imperfections" are interpreted as means to a desired outcome (a
specific price level).

While the framing is internally consistent, it should be acknowledged
that the idea that U.S. pharmaceutical regulation is designed to help
incorporate R&D incentives into prices can only be speculative.
Generally speaking, the U.S. tends to prefer market-based alternatives
in many areas where foreign governments intervene, but R&D is not a
primary concern (e.g., education, labor markets, telecommunications).

Still, the key implication of the paper's theoretical model---that
pharmaceutical R&D incentives are weakened by its public good
aspect---is relatively uncontroversial. It's very easy to check that the
benefits of pharmaceutical innovation reach all countries, even those
where pharmaceutical companies earn little to no revenue. Simple
examples in this space include the diffusion of antiretroviral therapies
for HIV/AIDS, the global adoption of cheap maintenance medication like
ACE inhibitors or statins for cardiovascular disease, and the
mRNA‐vaccine platform developed for COVID-19.

### Evaluating the claim that U.S. prices are lower-than-optimal (and ROW prices are above MC) {#evaluating-the-claim-that-us-prices-are-lower-than-optimal-and-row-prices-are-above-mc}

The paper claims that both U.S. and ROW prices are lower than what
optimal innovation incentives would dictate, though ROW prices are not
as low as some media descriptions indicate. This claim needs to be
evaluated both theoretically and empirically.

First, according to the theoretical framework presented in the paper,
the result is uncontroversially true and straightforward to derive.
Intuitively, each country is primarily concerned with the impact of R&D
on the future health of its citizens. But R&D generates positive
externalities for other countries as well, so, in equilibrium, prices
are too low.

We should ask, however, whether the model accurately reflects the state
of the world. The authors essentially assume that because U.S. (and
other) governments fully control how prices are set, the sum of all
policy tools used to determine prices generates the effects predicted by
their model. In practice, things are likely not that simple. Governments
frequently introduce drug pricing reforms (as the U.S. did very
recently). These reforms balance the incentives of various
constituencies and may not, in fact, reflect a centralized desire to
achieve a dynamic optimum.

Second, the empirical evidence the authors present relies on estimates
of cost-effectiveness ratios for drugs introduced in the U.S. The
authors, citing numbers from another one of their studies, claim that
new drugs launched in the U.S. are very cost-effective---around \$40,000
per Quality-Adjusted Life Year (QALY) (Frech et al. 2022
[@n8pt3l58xiz]). Indeed, the most broadly accepted estimate of QALY in
the economic literature is \$100,000 (Cutler and Richardson 1998
[@n3w141ljkvs]).

Overall, I believe this claim is sensible. However, there are two main
criticisms of these back-of-the-envelope calculations. First, estimates
of drug cost-effectiveness rely on many assumptions and are generally
highly sensitive to them. Readers interested in the complexities
surrounding these calculations should read assessments of new drugs made
by the Institute for Clinical and Economic Review (ICER) for the U.S.
market. Second, there is likely broad variation across indications in
the cost-effectiveness of drugs. For example, research on new oncology
drugs suggests that many of them are not particularly cost-effective
(Bach 2015 [@nn27yywd2cz]; Howard et al. 2015 [@nletfkz3oe4]).

Two other broader considerations (likely beyond the scope of the paper
but relevant to the question at hand) could also enter the assessment of
whether innovation is under- or over-provided:

1.  Generally, economists believe that innovation is *under*-provided
    because innovators generally can't capture the entire surplus
    generated by the innovation. This intuition applies to the
    pharmaceutical market, where, for example, patent protection has a
    limited duration, making it impossible to capture long-term gains.\

2.  However, some exceptions apply to this setting. First, governments
    provide substantial subsidies to pharmaceutical research and
    development (R&D) through agencies like the National Institutes of
    Health (NIH) and the National Science Foundation (NSF). Private
    foundations also contribute, though to a lesser degree. Second, most
    patients access pharmaceuticals through insurance, meaning that the
    price they pay is lower than the price the innovator receives.
    Insurance implies the possibility of moral hazard, e.g., consumption
    by agents whose value of the good is lower than its price. As a
    result, insurance encourages innovation (Lakdawalla and Sood 2009
    [@n78cmq27vfs]) and could, in extreme conditions, lead to
    over-provision of innovation.

### Interpreting the correlation between drug prices and GDP

The authors interpret the positive correlation between GDP and drug
prices as evidence supporting their hypothesis that drug prices are
affected by how much countries internalize returns from R&D (because
countries with higher GDP also benefit more from future innovation).
However, the relationship between GDP and drug prices could be driven by
many factors, chief among them the willingness to pay for current health
benefits.

It may be possible to devise a more convincing test of the
theory---perhaps by examining the within-country relationship between
GDP and drug prices over time---but ultimately, it is unlikely a truly
conclusive test exists.

### Discussing policy implications

The paper implies that drug prices should be higher in *all*
countries---including the U.S. While the theoretical underpinnings of
this result are sound, the inability to conclusively test this
hypothesis empirically suggests caution in implementing policy solutions
toward this goal.

Ultimately, the question of whether pharmaceutical innovation is under-
or over-provided remains open. Academics and policymakers interested in
this question can also review empirical evidence on the elasticity of
innovation with respect to market size (Dubois et al. 2015
[@nn34nlta905]; Blume-Kohout and Sood 2013 [@nm43059xbsk]; Garthwaite,
Sachs, and Stern 2021 [@nqssgz4c7wx]). However, with few exceptions
(Dranove, Garthwaite, and Hermosilla 2022 [@nvm19gycf9p]; Krieger, Li,
and Papnikolaou 2022 [@nriz36valfc]), this evidence tends to focus on
the effect of market size on the number of new drugs or clinical
trials---not their value.

## References

[@n4wmzxpy9k1] Frank, Richard G., and Richard J. Zeckhauser. 2018.
"High-Priced Drugs in Medicare Part D: Diagnosis and Potential
Prescription." Working Paper. Working Paper Series. National Bureau of
Economic Research. <https://doi.org/10.3386/w24240.>

[@nhv57q127sd] Sachs, Rachel E., and Richard G. Frank. 2025. "Assessing
the Effect of the Medicare Part D Redesign." *JAMA* 333 (8): 663--64.
<https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2024.25827.>

[@nrh1wjbyj6z] Duggan, M., & Scott Morton, F. M. (2006). The
Distortionary Effects of Government Procurement: Evidence from Medicaid
Prescription Drug Purchasing. *Quarterly Journal of Economics*,
*121*(1), 1--30.

[@ncmlv4o30eh]Ridley, David B., and Chung-Ying Lee. 2020. "Does Medicare
Reimbursement Drive Up Drug Launch Prices?" *The Review of Economics and
Statistics* 102 (5): 980--93. <https://doi.org/10.1162/rest_a_00849.>

[@n72oylvkbo0] Feng, J., Hwang, T., & Maini, L. (2023). Profiting from
Most-Favored Customer Procurement Rules: Evidence from Medicaid.
*American Economic Journal: Economic Policy*, *15*(2), 166--197.

[@nbvcpd3uq08]Fowler, A. 2019. "Hurry Up or Wait? Strategic Delay in the
Introduction of Pharmaceutical Line Extensions."
<https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/Hurry-Up-or-Wait-Strategic-Delay-in-the-of-Line-Fowler/95aee7b08806054309ba7b3858a9a873ff3d67b7.>

[@ndd5iszlo37] Jacobo-Rubio, Ruben, John L. Turner, and Jonathan W.
Williams. 2020. "The Distribution of Surplus in the US Pharmaceutical
Industry: Evidence from Paragraph Iv Patent-Litigation Decisions." *The
Journal of Law and Economics* 63 (2): 203--38.
<https://doi.org/10.1086/707407.>

[@nxmymmyt7ls] Frech, H. E., Mark V. Pauly, William S. Comanor, and
Joseph R. Martinez. 2022. "Costs and Benefits of Branded Drugs: Insights
from Cost-Effectiveness Research." *Journal of Benefit-Cost Analysis* 13
(2): 166--81. <https://doi.org/10.1017/bca.2022.12.>

[@nwxjjdzythv] Cutler, David M., and Elizabeth Richardson. 1998. "The
Value of Health: 1970-1990." *The American Economic Review* 88 (2):
97--100.

[@n4rv4l1jry6] Bach, Peter B. 2015. 'Ramucirumab for Colon Cancer and
the Problem of Rising Prices Independent of Benefits'. *The Oncologist*
20 (9): 983--84. <https://doi.org/10.1634/theoncologist.2015-0257>.

[@n834aj1zu0h] Howard, David H., Peter B. Bach, Ernst R. Berndt, and
Rena M. Conti. 2015. 'Pricing in the Market for Anticancer Drugs'.
*Journal of Economic Perspectives* 29 (1): 139--62.
<https://doi.org/10.1257/jep.29.1.139>.

[@npoh9aoxowd]** **Lakdawalla, Darius, and Neeraj Sood. 2009.
"Innovation and the Welfare Effects of Public Drug Insurance." *Journal
of Public Economics* 93 (3): 541--48.
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpubeco.2008.11.003.>

[@n10uwuxxybz] Dubois, Pierre, Olivier de Mouzon, Fiona Scott-Morton,
and Paul Seabright. 2015. "Market Size and Pharmaceutical Innovation."
*The RAND Journal of Economics* 46 (4): 844--71.
<https://doi.org/10.1111/1756-2171.12113.>

[@n5l78i89knh] Blume-Kohout, Margaret E., and Neeraj Sood. 2013. "Market
Size and Innovation: Effects of Medicare Part D on Pharmaceutical
Research and Development." *Journal of Public Economics* 97
(January):327--36. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpubeco.2012.10.003.

[@nsxsre4qhll] Garthwaite, Craig, Rebecca Sachs, and Ariel Dora Stern.
2021. 'Which Markets (Don't) Drive Pharmaceutical Innovation? Evidence
From U.S. Medicaid Expansions'. Working Paper. Working Paper Series.
National Bureau of Economic Research. <https://doi.org/10.3386/w28755>.

[@n7ixnwh2n96] Dranove, D., Garthwaite, C., & Hermosilla, M. (2022).
Does consumer demand pull scientifically novel drug innovation? *The
RAND Journal of Economics*, *53*(3), 590--638.

[@n5vigcbsmy8] Krieger, Joshua, Danielle Li, and Dimitris Papanikolaou.
2022. "Missing Novelty in Drug Development." *The Review of Financial
Studies* 35 (2): 636--79. <https://doi.org/10.1093/rfs/hhab024.>

[@n383b7qbfaf] Acquatella, Angelique, Keith Marzilli Ericson, and Amanda
Starc. 2023. "Lagged-Price Reimbursement Contracts: The Impact of
Medicare Part B on Pharmaceutical Price Growth." Working Paper. Working
Paper Series. National Bureau of Economic Research.
<https://doi.org/10.3386/w31834.>

[@n5yk0gtu9da] Frech, I., H. E., Pauly, M. V., Comanor, W. S., &
Martinez, J. R. (2023). *Pharmaceutical Pricing and R&D as a Global
Public Good* (Working Paper No. 31272). National Bureau of Economic
Research. <https://doi.org/10.3386/w31272>

[^1]: Note: if you are reading this before, or soon after this has been
    publicly released, the ratings from this paper may not yet have been
    incorporated into that data presentation.

[^2]: We asked them to rank this paper "heuristically" as a percentile
    "relative to all serious research in the same area that you have
    encountered in the last three years." We requested they "consider
    all aspects of quality, credibility, importance to knowledge
    production, and importance to practice.

[^3]: See ranking tiers discussed
    [here](https://globalimpact.gitbook.io/the-unjournal-project-and-communication-space/policies-projects-evaluation-workflow/evaluation/guidelines-for-evaluators#journal-ranking-tiers).
