---
article:
  elocation-id: eval1diseaseelimination
author:
- Evaluator 1 (Unjournal, anonymous)
bibliography: /tmp/tmp-46J30du7Xcb3gW.json
copyright:
  link: "https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/"
  text: Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License
  type: CC-BY
csl: /app/dist/server/server/utils/citations/citeStyles/apa-6th-edition.csl
date:
  day: 16
  month: 07
  year: 2024
journal:
  publisher-name: The Unjournal
  title: The Unjournal
link-citations: true
title: Evaluation 1 of "Economic vs. Epidemiological Approaches to
  Measuring the Human Capital Impacts of Infectious Disease Elimination"
uri: "https://unjournal.pubpub.org/pub/eval1diseaseelimination"
---

# Abstract 

*The following abstract was generated by the evaluation manager, with
the help of a chatbot. *Positives: (1) Novel epidemiological method for
imputing historical infection rates. (2) Interesting comparison of
epidemiological vs economic approaches. Limitations/suggestions: (3)
Conclusion favoring the economic approach needs stronger support. (4)
Concerned about identifying assumptions for 'sharp cohort design' ---
would like to see tests for 'no cohort pre-trends'. (5) Needs more
discussion of conceptual differences between mortality and infection
rates. (6) Could elaborate more on applicability to other diseases.

# Summary Measures

*Managers' note: The first evaluator's metrics are omitted as the
ratings given did not seem to reflect the content of the report.*

# Written report[^1]

Using insights from epidemiological modeling, this paper develops a
novel method to impute infection rates by birth cohort, which is
subsequently used to test for long-run socioeconomic effects of being
infected by measles as a child. This solves the problem that
age-specific infection rates are generally not available, in particular
not in the past. The authors exploit the fact that in a world with no
immunization (and where measles is endemic) almost everyone will
eventually be infected by measles during childhood. The invention of an
effective immunization method (vaccination) then generates plausible
exogenous variation in the share of a birth cohort infected by measles.
The authors apply their approach to study the long-run effects of
measles vaccination in the US and find insignificant effects on
different socioeconomic outcomes when controlling for cohort effects. In
other words, they cannot separate the effect of being infected with
measles as a child from other cohort-specific trends.

On the other hand, if the authors instead use pre-vaccination mortality
rates (age 0-5), share ever infected, or a combination, they find
positive socioeconomic effects of immunization against measles, even
when controlling for cohort fixed effects. The latter approach is often
used in "the economics literature" studying the long-run implications of
various disease eradication campaigns. One particularly interesting
benchmark here is the interesting paper by Atwood (2022)[@nqrng244ila],
who studies the exact same campaign, also using US data. She concludes
that measles vaccination had positive effects on income (among other
variables) and demonstrates that this conclusion is robust to
controlling for cohort fixed effects, along with a battery of other
robustness checks. This is consistent with the current study when the
campaign is evaluated using the "econ-approach", but not when applying
the "epi-approach". The authors of the current study conclude that their
evidence suggests that the econ-approach is better suited for isolating
long-run effects of a disease intervention campaign compared to the
epi-approach.

While I personally like this conclusion, the main question is whether it
is warranted. I believe that the authors could do a bit more to support
their interpretation. The main concern with the econ-approach is whether
this captures other cohort trends unrelated to the disease campaign
program (here vaccination against measles), since this strategy uses a
cross-sectional variable to measure how much cohorts across the country
could benefit from the campaign (i.e., intensity of treatment). In
particular, this treatment measure captures the experience of multiple
cohorts prior to the campaign. Thus, one could question whether this
measure is well-suited for a sharp cohort design. As far as I can tell
(and I might be wrong), Atwood (2022)[@n1xvovpwxx6] does not report any
event studies for the long-run outcomes, where 'event time' is birth
cohort. (She does provide a number of zero-stage-like event studies
where contemporary mortality rates are the outcomes). Essentially, I
would like to see that cohorts too old to benefit from the vaccination
campaign did not experience improved long-run outcomes (i.e., no cohort
pre-trends) and treatment dynamics as one would expect. If the authors
would provide such evidence, I believe that their conclusion would be
more robust, and very important for all studies applying the
econ-approach (and this literature seems to be growing over time).

Below I provide a few additional (mostly minor) comments:

1\) Beyond the issue of measurement (in particular cohort vs. period
measures), the authors could elaborate a bit more on the conceptual
difference between mortality rates and infection rates. These two rates
are connected via the fatality rate. Is there any *a priori* reason as
to why the fatality rate should vary across locations for a disease such
as measles?

2\) A study such as Acemoglu and Johnson (2007)[@nk2818fso8o], which is
cited for using the reduced-form econapproach, does not apply this
method in a sharp cross-cohort design. They compare countries over time,
which means by construction they want to measure how disease reductions
affected multiple cohorts (i.e., as such the entire population).
Jayachandran et al. (2010)[@nwyh5pwjcac] does not apply this design at
all (if I remember correctly). They instead compare diseases that could
be treated with sulfa drugs to disease that could not treated with sulfa
drugs to tell us something about how many life years this medical
innovation saved. The authors should perhaps try to group (the relevant)
studies into whether they apply the method in cohort designs and into
studies that look at the effects on populations.

3\) Although I think amounts to using the same sample variation, it is
perhaps more intuitive controlling for survey-year fixed effects instead
of age fixed effects.

4\) I am not completely sure why the authors refer to Eq. (8) as a
Bartik-type regression. Please elaborate. 5) The authors could discuss
more whether their epidemiological approach can applied to other
infectious diseases.

## References

[@nj7k84lroe0]Atwood, A. (2022). The Long-Term Effects of Measles
Vaccination on Earnings and Employment. *American Economic Journal:
Economic Policy*, *14*(2), 34--60.

[@nrcfs12tec0]Acemoglu, D., & Johnson, S. (2007). Disease and
Development: The Effect of Life Expectancy on Economic Growth. *Journal
of Political Economy*, *115*(6), 925--985.

[@nw4a0az7zem]Jayachandran, S., Lleras-Muney, A., & Smith, K. V. (2010).
Modern Medicine and the Twentieth Century Decline in Mortality: Evidence
on the Impact of Sulfa Drugs. *American Economic Journal: Applied
Economics*, *2*(2), 118--146.

#  {#r8939012559 .unnumbered}

[^1]: Managers note: We made some very small typographical adjustments
    to the evaluator's text. We also added the bracketed 'headers' above
    the numbered comments and within some sections.
